---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/1-4-sequences-and-series/","created":"2023-06-25T19:27:01.186+02:00","updated":"2023-09-05T21:55:55.966+02:00"}
---

# Limits of numerical sequences

Intuitively speaking, numerical sequences are a kind of discrete analogue of scalar function. Following this idea, we will develop a way to discuss limits of numerical sequences in analogy with [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions\|limits of scalar functions]]. 

>[!defn] Definition
>A numerical sequence is a function $a\colon \mathbb{N}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$. Often, a numerical sequence is also written as $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ where $a_{n}=a(n)$. 
>A numerical sequence is called:
>- **increasing** if $a_{n}<a_{n+1}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$;
>- **non-decreasing** if $a_{n}\leq a_{n+1}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$;
>- **decreasing** if $a_{n}>a_{n+1}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$;
>- **non-increasing** if $a_{n}\geq a_{n+1}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$;
>- **monotonic** if it satisfies any of the previous conditions;
>- **bounded from above** if there exists $B\in\mathbb{R}$ such that $a_{n}\leq B$  for every $n\in\mathbb{N}$;
>- **bounded from below** if there exists $B\in\mathbb{R}$ such that $a_{n}\geq B$  for every $n\in\mathbb{N}$;
>- **bounded** if it is both bounded from above and below.
>
>A numerical sequence $\{b_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ is a **subsequence** of the numerical sequence $\{a_{m}\}_{m\in\mathbb{N}}$ if $b_{n}=a_{n}$ for all $n\in \mathbb{N}$.

Obvious examples of numerical sequences are given by

$$
a_{n}= n, \quad a_{n}=n^{2},\quad a_{n}=n + (n-4)^{2}.
$$

Another important example of numerical sequence is the so-called [Fibonacci sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number), which is defined as 

$$ 
\left \{ \begin{matrix} a_{0}=a_{1}=1 &  \\ a_{n+1}= a_{n} + a_{n-1} & \mbox{ for } n>1 . \end{matrix} \right.  
$$

Note how the Fibonacci sequence requires the first two terms to be defined separately from the others. 

The notion of [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^cbf378\|limit]] for scalar functions requires the notion of [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^772289\|accumulation point]]. In the case of numerical sequences, the only possible (right) accumulation point is $+\infty$. 

>[!defn] Definition: [$\epsilon$-definition of limit of a  numerical sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limit_of_a_sequence#Formal_definition)
>Consider the numerical sequence $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$. We say that
>$$ 
>\lim_{n\rightarrow +\infty} a_{n}=l 
>$$
>with $l\in\mathbb{R}$ if for every $\epsilon>0$ there is a  $N\in\mathbb{N}$ such that
>$$
>n>N \Longrightarrow |a_{n}-l|<\epsilon .
>$$

>[!defn] Definition: [unbounded limit of a numerical sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limit_of_a_sequence#Infinite_limits)
>Consider the numerical sequence $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$. We say that
>$$ 
>\lim_{n\rightarrow +\infty} a_{n}=+\infty 
>$$
>if for every $K>0$ there is a  $N\in\mathbb{N}$ such that
>$$
>n>N \Longrightarrow a_{n}> K.
>$$
>Similarly, we say that
>$$ 
>\lim_{n\rightarrow +\infty} a_{n}=-\infty 
>$$
>if for every $K>0$ there is a  $N\in\mathbb{N}$ such that
>$$
>n>N \Longrightarrow a_{n}<- K.
>$${ #5a7f61}


>[!important] Proposition: uniqueness of limits of numerical sequences 
>If the limit for $n\rightarrow +\infty$ of the sequence $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ exists (being it finite or $\pm\infty$), then it is unique.

The similarity with the notions of limit for scalar functions should be apparent, and could lead you to conjecture that we can actually exploit what we already know to compute limits of sequences. If so, you are on the right track.

>[!important] Proposition
>Let $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ be a numerical sequence. Suppose there is a scalar function $f$ and $N\in\mathbb{N}$ such that $a_{n}=f(n)$ for all $n>N$. It then follows that
>$$
>\lim_{x\rightarrow +\infty}f(x)=l\quad \Longrightarrow \quad \lim_{n\rightarrow +\infty} a_{n}= l 
>$$
>with $l\in \overline{\mathbb{R}}=\mathbb{R}\cup\{+\infty,-\infty\}$.

>[!attention] Remark
>The existence of the limit for the function $f$ is mandatory. Indeed, once we introduce [[1.5 Power series, trascendental functions, and Taylor series\|tracendental functions]],  we have that the numerical sequence $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$  with $a_{n}=\sin(n\pi)$ vanishes identically so that its limit for $n\rightarrow +\infty$ is obviously $0$, while the limit for $x\rightarrow +\infty$ of the scalar function $f(x)=\sin(x\pi)$ does not exist!

>[!rem] Remark: numerical sequences and scalar functions
>It is clear that every scalar function $f\colon D\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ such that $[0,+\infty)\subseteq D$ gives rise to a numerical sequence setting
>$$
>a_{n}=f(n).
>$$
>However, the converse is not true. The prototypical example of numerical sequence that can not be obtained from a scalar function is
>$$
>a_{n}=n!= \left\{\begin{matrix}1 & \mbox{ if } n=0,1 \\  n(n-1)(n-2)\cdots 2 & \mbox{ if } n>1 \end{matrix}\right.,  
>$$
>where $n!$ denotes the [factorial of $n$](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factorial), that is, the possible distinct sequences of $n$ distinct objects. 

The [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^ec717d\|squeeze theorem]], as well as all the [[1.2 Limits of scalar functions#^55a3be\|algebraic manipulations]] valid for limits of scalar functions have their appropriate counterpart in the context of numerical sequences. Two important additional results are recalled below:

- every bounded numerical sequence has at least one convergent subsequence (**Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem**);
- every non-decreasing (non-increasing) numerical sequence which is bounded from above (below) converges.

# Numerical series

Let us start considering the beautiful number $2$: 

$$ 
\begin{split}
2& =1+1=1+\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{2}= \\
 & = 1+ \frac{1}{2}  +  \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{4} = \\
 &= \sum_{n=0}^{2}\frac{1}{2^{n}}  + \frac{1}{2^{2}}. 
\end{split}
$$

The procedure can clearly continue for every $n$ up to an arbitrary integer $N$: 

$$ 
2=\sum_{n=0}^{N}\frac{1}{2^{n}}+ \frac{1}{2^{N}}. 
$$

Can we extend it to infinity? This is equivalent to give sense to the equality 
$$ 
2=\sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}\frac{1}{2^{n}}. 
$$

It turns out that Mathematics allows us to deal with infinite sum! 

>[!defn] Definition: Series and their limits
> Given a numerical sequence $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ we define the numerical **sequence of partial sums** $\{s_{k}\}_{k\in\mathbb{N}}$ given by 
> $$ s_{k}=\sum_{n=0}^{k}\,a_{n}. $$ 
> If $\{s_{k}\}_{k\in\mathbb{N}}$  converges to $L$, we write
> $$
> \sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}a_{n}=L
> $$ 
> and say that the **numerical series** 
> $$
> S=\sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}a_{n}
> $$ 
> is **convergent**. The series $S$ is said to be **absolutely convergent** if the series 
> $$
> S'=\sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}|a_{n}|
> $$
>  is convergent.
{ #32251b}


>[!important] Proposition
>Every **absolutely convergent** series is **convergent**.

>[!example] Example: the geometric series
>The geometric series is associated with the numerical sequence 
>$$
>a_{n}= x^{n}
>$$
>with $x\in\mathbb{R}$. We can study the geometric series in great detail and calculate its value. 
>Indeed, if we consider the numerical sequence of partial sums 
>$$
>s_{k}=\sum_{n=0}^{k} x^{n},
>$$
>a little thought shows that
>$$
>s_{k}= k + 1
>$$
>when $x=1$, which means the series diverges. On the other hand, when $x\neq 1$, it holds 
>$$
>x\,s_{k}=x\sum_{n=0}^{k}x^{n}=x + x^{2} + \cdots + x^{k} + x^{k+1} = s_{k} -1 + x^{k+1},
>$$
>which means
>$$
>(x-1)s_{k}=x^{k} -1\;\Longrightarrow\; s_{k}= \frac{x^{k+1} -1}{x-1}.
>$$
>If $x>1$ the sequence $s_{k}$ diverges to $+\infty$, while if $x<-1$ the sequence does not have a limit since its values are positive for $k+1$ even and negative for $k+1$ odd. The case $|x|<1$ is the only case in which $s_{k}$ converges and it holds
>$$
>\sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}a_{n} = \lim_{k\rightarrow +\infty}s_{k} = \frac{1}{1-x} .
>$$
{ #bf33d9}


# Properties and convergence tests for numerical series

Not all numerical sequences give rise to converging series. One **necessary condition** (but not sufficient!) is the following.

>[!important] Proposition
> If the numerical series determined by $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ converges then
> $$
> \lim_{n\rightarrow +\infty}a_{n}=0.
> $$

Some important results are collected in the proposition below (and their proofs can be found, for instance, in Chapter 11 of [S-E-H](https://www.wiley.com/en-us/Calculus:+One+and+Several+Variables,+10th+Edition-p-9780471698043)).

>[!important] Proposition
>Let $S_{a}$ be the series determined by $\{a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ and $S_{b}$ be the series determined by $\{b_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$:
>
>- if $S_{a}$ converges to $L$ and $S_{b}$ converges to $M$ then $S_{a+b}$ converges to $L+M$;
>- if $a_{n}\geq 0$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$, then $S_{a}$ converges **if and only if** the sequence of partial sums is **bounded**;
>- if $0\leq a_{n+1}\geq a_{n}$ for every $n\in\mathbb{N}$ the limit of $a_{n}$ is $0$, then the series associated with the alternating sequence $\{(-1)^{n}a_{n}\}_{n\in\mathbb{N}}$ converges (**Leibniz test**);
>- every rearrangement of an absolutely convergent series converges to the same limit while a rearrangement of a convergent series can do basically everything (**Riemann's theorem 1867**).

Finding the explicit value of infinite sums is very difficult, and we often only need to know if the series converges or not.

>[!important] Proposition: comparison test
>If $0\leq a_{n}\leq b_{n}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$, then 
>$$ \sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}b_{n}<+\infty \quad \Rightarrow \quad \sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}a_{n}<+\infty $$ and 
>$$ \sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}a_{n}=+\infty \quad \Rightarrow \quad \sum_{n=0}^{+\infty}b_{n}=+\infty. $$ 

>[!important] Proposition: root test 
>Let $0\leq a_{n}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$ and 
>$$
>\lim_{n\rightarrow +\infty}\sqrt[n]{a_{n}} =L
>$$
>1. If $0\leq L<1$ then the series **converges**;
>2. if $L>1$ then the series **does not converge**;
>3. if $L=1$ then the test is inconclusive.
{ #3a9a60}


>[!important] Proposition: ratio test
>Let $0\leq a_{n}$ for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$ and $$ \lim_{n\rightarrow+\infty}\frac{a_{n+1}}{a_{n}}=L. $$
>1. If $0\leq L<1$ then the series **converges**;
>2. if $L>1$ then the series **does not converge**;
>3. if $L=1$ then the test is inconclusive.
{ #b44184}


# Final remarks

It is undeniable that, after thinking about sequences and series, the best next thing to do is to listen to some of the beauty created by the [Led Zeppelin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Frusciante):

- [Good times bad times](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TA9Rec1qAFQ)
- [Since I've been lovin you](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcIem-L398w)
- [What is and what should never be](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LiczyhDwuBs)
- [Stairway to heaven](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QkF3oxziUI4)