---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/2-5-exercises/","created":"2023-08-24T17:05:25.544+02:00","updated":"2023-10-25T16:57:27.861+02:00"}
---

## Change of coordinates

1) Recalling how the [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^1f484e\|cylindrical]] and [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^b5d3f4\|spherical]] coordinates are expressed in terms of the Cartesian coordinates, find the function determining the passage from cylindrical to spherical coordinates and its inverse.  
	 >[!note]- Solution:
	> Compose $\psi_{cyl}$ of [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^1f484e\|cylindrical coordinates]] with $\psi^{-1}_{sph}$ of [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^b5d3f4\|spherical coordinates]] to get how cylindrical coordinates are expressed in terms of spherical coordinates. Exchange the role of $\psi$ and $\psi^{-1}$ to obtain how spherical coordinates are expressed using cylindrical coordinates.

2) Determine the expression in cylindrical and spherical coordinates of the function $(D,\mathbb{R}^{3},f,\mathbb{R})$ expressed in Cartesian coordinates by:
	$$	\begin{split} 	1) &\qquad  f(x,y,z)= x^{2} + y^{2} +z^{2}  \\ & \\ 	2) &\qquad  f(x,y,z)=\left(x,\;y-z,\; 3 \right) \\ & \\ 	3) & \qquad f(x,y,z)= \mathrm{e}^{x^{2} + y^{2} +z} . \end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution:
	>Compose $f$ with $\psi^{-1}$ of [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^1f484e\|cylindrical coordinates]] or [[2.1 From 1 to many dimensions#^b5d3f4\|spherical coordinates]].

3) If the expression of $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ in polar coordinates is
	$$	f(r,\theta) = r + \theta ,	$$
	determine the value of $f$ a the point $\mathbf{p}$ with Cartesian coordinates $(p_{x}=0, p_{y}=1)$, $(p_{x}=1,p_{y}=1)$, and $(p_{x}=2,p_{y}=3)$.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>In Cartesian coordinates, the point $(0,1)$ corresponds to the point $(1,\pi/2)$ in polar coordinates, while the point $(2,3)$ corresponds to the point $(\sqrt{13},\arctan(3/2))$.


4) Let $(\mathbb{R},\mathbb{R},f, \mathbb{R})$ be expressed as
	$$ f(x)=\frac{\mathrm{e}^{2x} - 2 + \mathrm{e}^{-2x}}{4} 
	$$
	in Cartesian coordinates. Determine a change of coordinate $(A,\mathbb{R},\psi,\mathbb{R})$ leading to
	$$ f\circ\psi(v) = v^{2} $$
	and discuss its domain of applicability.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>Note that $\mathrm{e}^{2x} - 2 + \mathrm{e}^{-2x}=(\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{-x})^{2}$. The change of coordinates can be understood as $x(v)=\psi(v)$, and we must have
	>$$ \frac{(\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{-x})^{2}}{4}=f\circ\psi(v)=v^{2},$$
	>which means we can take $\psi(v)=\frac{\mathrm{e}^{x}-\mathrm{e}^{-x}}{2}$. This change of coordinates is valid for all $v$ and $x$ because both the domain and range of $\psi$ are $\mathbb{R}$. Note that $\tilde{\psi}(v)=-\psi(v)$ is another, perfectly valid choice.

5) Let $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ be expressed as
	$$ f(x,y)= ax + by $$
	in Cartesian coordinates with $a,b\neq 0$. Determine a change of coordinate $\psi\colon A\subseteq \mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{2}$ leading to 
	$$ f\circ\psi(v,w)= v^2 - w^{3},$$
	and discuss its domain of applicability. Is $\psi$ unique?
	>[!note]- Solution
	>There are infinitely many change of coordinates satisfying the constraint imposed. Indeed, we can take $\psi(v,w)=(x(v,w),y(v,w))$ with $x(v,w)=\alpha v^{2} +\beta w^{3}$, $y(v,w)=\gamma v^{2} +\delta w^{3}$ and $\alpha,\beta,\gamma,\delta$ satisfying $a(\alpha + \gamma )=1$ and $b(\beta + \delta)=-1$. In order for $\psi$ to be a valid change of coordinates, we must impose that $\alpha,\beta,\gamma,\delta$ are such that $\psi$ can be inverted somewhere, and this determines the domain of applicability. For instance, taking $\alpha=1/a$, $\delta=-1/b$, and $\beta=\gamma=0$, we have that $\psi^{-1}$ only exists when $x\geq 0$. On the other hand, if we take $\alpha=\beta=0$, $\gamma=1/a$, and $\delta=-1/b$, then $\psi^{-1}$ does not exist because  $(v,w)=\psi^{-1}\circ\psi(v,w)=\psi^{-1}(0,v^{2}+w^{3})$ is impossible.

# Limits of multivariable functions

1) Prove the following limits:
	 $$ 	 \begin{split} 	 1) &\qquad  \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)}\,\frac{x^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}=0 \\ & \\ 	 2) &\qquad  \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)}\,\frac{2x^{2}\,y}{x^{2} + y^{2}}=0 \\ & \\ 	 3) & \qquad \lim_{x\rightarrow 1} \;(x^{2},\;\mathrm{e}^{x^{3} -1}) = (1,\;1) \\ & \\ 	 4) & \qquad \lim_{(x,y,z)\rightarrow (0,0,0)}\,\frac{xyz}{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} =0 \\ & \\ 	 5) & \qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)}\,\frac{xy}{x^{2} +y^{2} +2}=0. \end{split} 	 $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) We have to prove that, for every $\epsilon>0$, there is $\delta_{\epsilon}>0$ such that $\Vert\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{0}\Vert=\sqrt{(x-0)^{2}+(y-0)^{2}}=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}<\delta$ implies 
	>		$$ \vert\frac{x^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}}\vert<\epsilon .$$
	>		At this purpose, we note that 
	>		$$ x^{2}\leq x^{2} + y^{2}\Longrightarrow \vert\frac{x^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}}\vert\leq \vert\frac{x^{2}+y^{2}}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}} \vert=\vert \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}} \vert $$
	>		so that $\delta_{\epsilon}<\epsilon$ does the job.
	>2) We have to prove that, for every $\epsilon>0$, there is $\delta_{\epsilon}>0$ such that $\Vert\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{0}\Vert=\sqrt{(x-0)^{2}+(y-0)^{2}}=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}<\delta$ implies 
	>		$$ \vert\frac{2x^{2}y}{ x^{2}+y^{2} }\vert<\epsilon .$$
	>		At this purpose, we note that $x^{2}\leq x^{2} + y^{2}$ and $|y|=\sqrt{y^{2}}\leq \sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}$, so that
	>		$$  \vert\frac{2x^{2}y}{ x^{2}+y^{2} }\vert\leq \frac{2(x^{2}+y^{2})\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}{ x^{2}+y^{2} }=2 \sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}, $$
	>		and thus $\delta_{\epsilon}<\epsilon$ does the job.
	>3) In this case, we have a vector function whose components are continuous functions for all $x\in\mathbb{R}$. Therefore, the limit can be found by simply putting $x=1$.
	>4) We have to prove that, for every $\epsilon>0$, there is $\delta_{\epsilon}>0$ such that $\Vert\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{0}\Vert=\sqrt{(x-0)^{2}+(y-0)^{2} + (z-0)^{2}}=\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}<\delta$ implies
	>		$$ \vert \frac{xyz}{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} \vert < \epsilon.$$
	>		At this purpose, we just note that $|x|=\sqrt{x^{2}}\leq\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}$ (and similarly for $|y|$ and $|z|$), so that
	>		$$\vert \frac{xyz}{x^{2} + y^{2} + z^{2}} \vert\leq \sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}}, $$
	>		and thus $\delta_{\epsilon}<\epsilon$ does the job.
	>5) In this case, we have the quotient of polynomials (continuous functions) whose denominator does not vanish when $(x,y)=(0,0)$, so that the limit can be computed putting $(x,y)=(0,0)$.
	

2) Prove that the following limits do not exist:
	$$ \begin{split} 1) &\qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{x^{2}+\sin^{2}(y)}{2x^{2}+y^{2}} \\ & \\ 2)  & \qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{x^{2}y\mathrm{e}^{y}}{x^{4}+4y^{2}}  \\ & \\ 3) & \qquad \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{x\cos(xy)}{3x^{3}+y} \\ & \\ 4) & \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{\sin(2x) - 2x +y}{x^{3}+y} \qquad \\ & \\ 5) & \lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)} \frac{\cos(x) - 1 + \frac{x^{2}}{2}}{x^{4}+y^{4}} . \qquad   .\end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) Evaluate what happens when  $y=mx$ and $x\rightarrow 0$.
	>2) Evaluate what happens when  $y=mx^{2}$ and $x\rightarrow 0$.
	>3) Evaluate what happens when  $y=mx^{3}$ and $x\rightarrow 0$.
	>4) Evaluate what happens when  $y=-x^{3}+2x$ and $x\rightarrow 0$, and then what happens when $x=0$ and $y\rightarrow 0$.
	>5) Evaluate what happens when  $y=0$ and $x\rightarrow 0$, and then what happens when $x=0$ and $y\rightarrow 0$.
	

3) Determine the points at which $(\mathbb{R}^{2},\mathbb{R}^{2},f,\mathbb{R})$ is continuous when
	$$ \begin{split} 1)\quad  & f(x,y) = \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{x^{2}y^{3}}{2x^{2}+y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 1 & (x,y)=(0,0)\end{matrix}\right.  \\ & \\ 2)\quad & f(x,y)  = \left\{\begin{matrix}\frac{xy}{x^{2}+xy + y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) .\end{matrix}\right. \end{split}$$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is continuous because it is the quotient of polynomials whose denominator never vanishes. Evaluating what happens when $y=mx$, and $x\rightarrow 0$, we obtain $0$. Therefore, even if the limit for $(x,y)\rightarrow(0,0)$ existed, it would be equal to $0\neq f(0,0)=1$, so that the function is not continuous at $(0,0)$.
	>2) Outside $(0,0)$, the function is continuous for essentially the same reasons of point 1). Evaluating what happens when $y=mx$, and $x\rightarrow 0$, we obtain $\frac{m}{1+m+m^{2}}$, which means the function is not continuous at $(0,0)$.


# Derivatives and second order Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions


1) Compute the matrix of partial derivatives of the following functions
	$$ \begin{split} 1) &\qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R},\qquad f(x,y)=x\mathrm{e}^{x^{2} - y^{2}} \\ & \\ 2) & \qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R},\qquad f(x,y)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \frac{xy}{\sqrt{x^{2}+y^{2}}} & (x,y)\neq (0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) \end{matrix}\right.\\ & \\ 3) & \qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R},\qquad f(x,y)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \frac{x^{2}y}{x^{4}+y^{2} } & (x,y)\neq (0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) \end{matrix}\right.\\ & \\ 4) &\qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{3},\qquad f(x,y,z)=\left(\begin{matrix}3x +5y \\ 2y + 6z^{2} \\x^{3} - y^{5} +z^{7}   \end{matrix}\right)\\ & \\ 5) &\qquad f\colon\mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{3},\qquad f(x,y,z)=\left(\begin{matrix}\ln(x^{2}+y^{2}+1 ) \\ 2y\,\cos(z^{2}x) \\ \arctan\left(x^{4} +y^{4} + \sqrt{z^{2} +1}\right)   \end{matrix}\right)\\ & \\ \end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>1) amounts to routine computations. 
	>2) Outside (0,0), we take partial derivative as in the one-dimensional case. In $(0,0)$, we need to apply [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc\|the definition]] of partial derivative as a limit. Since the numerator is $xy$, both partial derivatives are $0$.
	>3) Outside (0,0), we take partial derivative as in the one-dimensional case. In $(0,0)$, we need to apply [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc\|the definition]] of partial derivative as a limit. Since the numerator is $x^{2}y$, both partial derivatives are $0$.
	>4) amounts to routine computations. 
	>5) amounts to routine computations. 

2) Verify the validity of the chain rule for $f\circ g$ in the following cases
	$$ \begin{split} 1) &\qquad f(x,y)=xy, \quad g(t)=(\mathrm{e}^{t},\cos(t))\\ &  \\ 2) &\qquad f(x,y)=(x^{2} + y^{2})\ln\left(\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}\right), \quad g(t)=(\mathrm{e}^{t},\mathrm{e}^{-t}) \\ & \\ 3) &\qquad f(u,v)=(\tan(u-1) - \mathrm{e}^{v}, u^{2} - v^{2}),\quad g(x,y)=(\mathrm{e}^{x-y},x-y),\quad(x,y)=(1,1) \\ & \\ 4) &\qquad f(u, v, w) = (\mathrm{e}^{u-w}, \cos(v + u) + \sin(u + v + w)),\quad g(x, y) = (\mathrm{e}^{x} , \cos( y -x), \mathrm{e}^{-y} ),  \quad (x,y)=(0, 0). \end{split} $$
	>[!note]- Solution
	>For all points of the exercise, either we perform all the derivatives directly, or we notice that the functions involved satisfy [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^9ceaa7\|the assumptions of the chain rule theorem]], so that the chain rule must hold.

3) Let $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{3}\rightarrow \mathbb{R}$ be differentiable. Use the chain rule to obtain the partial derivatives in spherical and cylindrical coordinates. **Hint**: remember that a change of coordinates is associated with a function $\psi$ so that the function in the new coordinates system is $f\circ\psi$.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>TBA

4) Consider the function $f\colon\mathbb{R}^{2}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}$ given by

$$
f(x,y)=\left\{\begin{matrix} \frac{xy^{2}}{x^{2} + y^{2}} & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ & \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0).\end{matrix}\right. 
$$

Compute the partial derivatives at $(0,0)$. Then, consider the function $g\colon\mathbb{R}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{2}$ given by $g(t)=(at,bt)$ with $a,b\in\mathbb{R}$ and compute the derivative of $f\circ g$ at $t=0$ both directly and using the chain rule. What can we conclude? { #fbb3a9}

	>[!note]- Solution
	>Outside $(0,0)$, the partial derivatives can be computed following the rules of the one-dimensional case. In $(0,0)$, we need to apply [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^c8b7dc\|the definition]] of partial derivatives as limits. Since the numerator is $x^{2}y$, both partial derivatives are $0$.
	>The derivative of $f\circ g(t)$ is easily computed to be $\frac{ab^{2}}{a^{2}+b^{2}}$ at all $t\in\mathbb{R}$. However, the gradient vector (matrix of partial derivatives) of $f$ at (0,0)  is $(0,0)$, so that a direct application of the formula [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^9ceaa7\|on the left-hand-side of the chain rule]] gives $Df(g(0))g'(0)=0$. We thus conclude that the hypothesis of the chain rule theorem are not met. In particular, $f$ is not differentiable at $(0,0)$. Indeed, the limit
	>$$\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)} \left| \frac{f(x,y)-f(0,0) - f_{x}(0)\,x -f_{y}(0)\,y}{\sqrt{x^{2} + y^{2}}}\right| =\lim_{(x,y)\rightarrow (0,0)} \left| \frac{xy^{2}}{(x^{2} + y^{2})^{\frac{3}{2}}}\right|, $$
	> [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^801be3\|that must be]] $0$ to ensure differentiability, does not exist because, evaluating what happens when $y=mx$ and $x\rightarrow 0$, we obtain an answer that depends on $m$.

5) Show that the function $(\mathbb{R}^{2},\mathbb{R}^{2},f,\mathbb{R})$ given by
	$$ f(x,y)= \left\{\begin{matrix}(x^{2}+y^{2})\,\sin\left(\frac{1}{x^{2}+y^{2}}\right) & (x,y)\neq(0,0) \\ 0 & (x,y)=(0,0) \\ \end{matrix}\right.$$
	has partial derivatives that are continuous everywhere except $(0,0)$. Nonetheless, show that it is differentiable at $(0,0)$.
	>[!note]- Solution
	>This is exercise is essentially [[2.3 Derivatives and Taylor's theorem for multivariable functions#^bed62d\|this one]] in disguise.
	

6) Compute the second order Taylor's expansion for
	$$ \begin{split} 1) \quad f(x,y) & =\frac{1}{x^{2}+y^{2}+1}, & \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(0,0) \\ 2) \quad f(x,y) & =\cos(x)\sin(y), & \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(\pi,\frac{\pi}{2}) \\ 3) \quad f(x,y) & =\mathrm{e}^{-x^{2}-y^{2}}\cos(xy),& \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(0,0) \\ 4) \quad f(x,y) & = \mathrm{e}^{(x-1)^{2}} \cos(y),& \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(1,0) \\ 5) \quad f(x,y) & = \sin(xy)-3x^{2}\ln(y) + 1, & \qquad (x_{0},y_{0})&=(\pi/2,1) . \end{split}$$

